[Pixel2Mesh: Generating 3D Mesh Models from Single RGB Images](https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_ECCV_2018/papers/Nanyang_Wang_Pixel2Mesh_Generating_3D_ECCV_2018_paper.pdf)

Multiview to 3D mesh reconstruction. Deform a template sphere mesh to align it with the images from each given viewpoints via rendering. 

However, it's very challenging to generate a mesh with arbitrary topology directly.

Its optimization process is very slow, because only the first intersection point  is rendered so that is affected in gradient descent.

 

[DIST: Rendering Deep Implicit Signed Distance Function With Differentiable Sphere Tracing](https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_CVPR_2020/papers/Liu_DIST_Rendering_Deep_Implicit_Signed_Distance_Function_With_Differentiable_Sphere_CVPR_2020_paper.pdf)

A technique to render an implicit surface with sphere tracing. Iterate advancing the ray by the current signed distance until the distance approach zero.

However, this process is not differentiable and is computational expensive, very challenging to achieve converge.



A solution is apply volume rendering. Relax the condition that the shape is a solid object and image it as a volume.



[DeepVoxels: Learning Persistent 3D Feature Embeddings](https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_CVPR_2019/papers/Sitzmann_DeepVoxels_Learning_Persistent_3D_Feature_Embeddings_CVPR_2019_paper.pdf)

Encode 2D image information in 3D voxels. Use GRU per voxel to integrate information from multi-view images.

Limitation: memory cost heavily. Cannot change resolution.



NeRF.

Training slow... Cannot scale to large scenes...

Require accurate camera information, cannot handle dynamic scenes, cannot change light.

